I can do Jim Carroll.
Don't even think about it.
It's there.
It'll pick up.
Okay.
Congratulations on the book.
And tell me Requiem, an American Requiem.
Explain the title for me, the choice of title.
Well, let's put this closer.
All right.
You know, I think actually I was maybe inspired by that Brahms, a German Requiem.
which is, of course, a great piece of music.
Requiem appealed to me because it's not just a funeral mass, a requiem.
There's a connotation in the ritual event of a requiem, that it's kind of the end of something.
You have a requiem at the end of the war, the war requiem, Benjamin Britten.
But what I really love about the word, so for me, there is very much the end of something here, and there's the connotations that I especially value in that word, requiem, are, well, it means in Latin to rest, requiescat in pace.
We call a requiem a requiem because the first words of the ritual are requiescat in pace, rest in peace.
So there's this idea of laying to rest, laying to rest someone.
My father literally
The story begins and ends with a Mass.
It begins with my first Mass, ends with my Father's funeral Mass.
So there's this connotation of rest.
But also for me, I value the connotation of prayer, that it is a kind of handing over.
For me, prayer is handing over to God the things we can't carry by ourselves.
And in this case, I feel like I'm handing over to whoever reads the book.
what I couldn't carry by myself.
Is this your first work on nonfiction?
Not really.
Of course, it came to me through the nonfiction work I do for the Globe as a columnist.
Well, when I was a priest, I published a number of books, which are happily long since out of print.
And I didn't...
I say happily because, not that I would repudiate the sensibility of those books, but I didn't apply the proper standard of writing to them, so they're not well written.
But I wrote as a priest in a non-fiction voice, works of popular theology and politics, writing about the war and so forth.
No, this is my first work in non-fiction, yes.
So it's my tenth book, the first nine of which were novels.
And one of which you point out towards the end of the memoir.
By the way, do you think of it as a memoir?
Well, the word I used to myself about it was a personal history.
But I suppose it is a memoir.
I'm not sure what the distinction is.
You point out that the family trade was more or less written as an attempt at rapprochement with the Asada.
At first it succeeded.
And then you read some piece in the Washington Post, a ballistic line.
Right.
But did you have it in your mind all along that you might be attempting, trying, resolving this schism, I guess, to what you do for it?
Well, I knew, you know, years and years and years ago, I knew that my family...
was embarked on a fantastic story.
I mean, the coincidence, you know, the story of my father's young life and his romance with my mother and his career, I knew that was, and then my brother's polio and the curse of that, and then, of course, everything coming to a terrible climax in Vietnam.
But even there, you know, looking around one day, realizing one day I have one brother in FBI and another brother is a fugitive.
I'm sort of secretly an opponent of the war.
I mean, and the old man is helping to pick targets.
I'm thinking, shit, what is this, a movie?
You know?
I mean, it's a story.
And then as you find out later, he has problems with it.
And he had his own story going on that I wasn't privy to.
Right, which was about the bomb.
Which caused him extraordinary anguish.
Right, right.
I mean, if you recall that, that one moment where, I forget, he's playing golf in Puerto Rico, and he said, the bomb, you know, make weapons that we don't use.
Right, right, right.
And I opened it.
Right, it is.
And there are these moments through my life that I, as a fiction writer, would never be able to invent.
That moment I report, uh,
My father, you know, telling me to get ready to take my brothers and my mother south for when the bomb was dropped.
I mean, you know, I remember at the time, I wasn't a storyteller at the time, but I remember at the time knowing very well that I would never forget this, and that this would be a moment that I would always return to, so.
But you could almost see there the novel still being taken.
even long before you knew you would be alone.
Remembering that little telling detail of that side of the newspaper.
Oh, the newspaper, yeah.
The temptation would have been.
Right, right.
Who the hell do you think you're talking through?
You know, that's fine, he's right.
I'm here delivering papers to his kids.
But remember the significance of that.
many, many years later.
I didn't keep notes of any of these things.
I did a piece on Toby Wolfe a couple of years ago.
He published his memoir.
Unlike so many others who have written about these years, he didn't keep a single note.
And he said, what's important to me is what comes up to the prism of memory.
And I wonder if a similar kind of situation would be true.
It's true.
It's true, and I trust the memory.
And what's important is what you remember.
What's important is what you remember.
Although there are things you forget that... I mean, one of the things I experienced in the writing of this book was the thrill of remembering, because there were things that I didn't remember until I was actually tracking what happened.
And then I'd remember, oh my God, that's right.
You know, remembering the disputes in my...
the distinction between the disputes in my family between the war and over Martin Luther King, for example.
I mean, before I started to work on the book, it all blurred, just remembering this kind of general discord.
But then when I started to take it apart and remembered, you know, that, well, my father and I were like this over Martin Luther King before I had a second thought about the war.
Because who had a second thought about the war in 65?
I remember I graduated college in 65, and it was really just asserting itself.
The question was, how are you going to keep the Germans now?
You know, the moral break.
I mean, the divisions, they were starting there.
Yeah.
But there was already this huge gulf opening in our society over the Civil Rights Movement.
And so from the pleasure, there was a kind of recovery of something important when I remembered that, that's right, there were two movements here that followed each other.
And so the writing of it was reclaiming a lot of things that I hadn't been in touch with.
Not this... Right.
Not this direct story.
And I knew that when he died, and as I explained, my father died, you know, right in the height of the Persian Gulf War, which struck me as, you know, novel.
I'm thinking, well, I just obviously someday I'm going to have to write this, you know, and what it was to be in Arlington Cemetery with these armed men.
firing weapons while across the river people are marshalling for a peace demonstration.
It was, well, I mean, I constantly have the experience of, I feel in a sense like I'm going to break with the
the weight of an event like that, and I had that feeling through a lot of this story.
Did you approach it professionally as a writer, which you obviously did, but I mean, you don't see it as a form of exorcism?
No, I'm finishing a story, and I mean, at one level, I feel a certain embarrassment and humility about it because I'm 53 years old, and I could imagine someone saying in reaction to this story, well, he's finally come to terms with his father.
Welcome.
Welcome to the life of an adult.
I mean, that's at one level.
Well, I would understand it.
I mean, it's taken me my life to now to, in a sense, lay to rest, as I said, my youthful struggle with my father.
And so I wouldn't use the word exorcism particularly, but it certainly is a laying to rest.
Well, you know, I think I was finishing this last year when Robert McNamara's book was published.
I did.
And I was aware, vividly aware, that McNamara's book demonstrated very powerfully that this nation has yet to lay this business to rest.
And it isn't just, quote, my generation, unquote.
I mean, there's my parents' generation, too.
The fact is that experience that we, that welter of experiences that we capture in that one word, Vietnam, is business we just haven't finished with as a people.
And so to an extent, this book finishes a large piece of it for me, although
I'm sure in other ways there are other things that are unfinished.
When you were at Georgetown, you were at ROTC, you were cadet of the year.
I was cadet of the year.
Thanks to point out probably to your father's position.
But in any case, had you not decided to go as a poet,
Do you think you would have gone forward?
Oh, sure.
And have sought out a career to become a flyboy?
Yeah, well, I would have graduated from college in 64.
I'd have gotten my commissioners.
You'd have not fully an obligation, actually.
I'd have gone into flight school, and I would have gone to Vietnam.
And that class of flyers who went to Vietnam were the ones who were, by an overwhelming ratio, shot down.
When we're done, I'll tell you my own parallel experience.
Well, I'd like to hear it.
But I've often thought that my other experience could well have been, instead of seven years on ice in a seminary, I could have been seven years on ice in a North Vietnamese prison camp.
I think what I'm exploring is the what if.
Yeah, right.
And it seems apparent that you really didn't want to be a priest.
I mean, there may have been an internal struggle, but it seems to me that you felt the origins of, I mean, you enjoyed appreciating the nice
You'd much rather become a typical American male.
It seems to me that that's what you would have preferred for yourself after that, correct?
Well, I was a divided young fellow, and that's certainly true.
There was this piece of me that wanted a girl, wanted the world, wanted a world of success, wanted to fly airplanes, wanted all of that.
The truth is, there was this other piece of me, which still is, for want of a better word, religious.
And the felt presence of God is a very powerful experience.
And that's what enabled me to do what I did.
You know, it wasn't just all those years of pretending something.
I miscommunicated that that's the impression I left you with.
There was something deeply...
consoling to me in feeling close to God, which I learned to do by going to the seminary.
Yeah, but there was this somewhat epiphanous moment, which was also a moment of weakness, when your father was telling me something, when he said, I wanted to be a priest.
Right, right.
And then I was stuck with having said it.
That was the point of no reason.
Right, right.
And I said that in relationship to my father's showing me
his deep humanity.
Giving you a side of himself that he'd never done before and I don't think ever did again.
Right.
Not verbally.
And in response to that, you committed yourself to something.
Had you not committed yourself at that moment, you wouldn't have... Right.
No, I probably wouldn't have.
In fact, and then a couple of years later, as I say somewhere in there, I could have fulfilled the same impulse by going to the Peace Corps, which wasn't an option in 1960.
That's right.
But by 63, it was.
It was, yeah.
And...
That impulse, that is, to be of service, to do good, to be virtuous, the opposite impulse from being a warrior, being a man of power, a man of ambition.
So you take what you get.
Of course, I was also unconsciously playing out the drama of my father and mother's unfinished business with his own vocation, which I wasn't particularly conscious of.
And that really does... Shave me.
That goes a lot deeper, doesn't it?
It does, yes.
That other scene, you talk about the telling scene.
I could think of a moment for my own youth playing baseball, you know, and whacking one.
And my father happened to be there.
What a moment back then.
I was never a great athlete like this.
You had a moment.
It was a wonderful, wonderful moment.
And then when you repeated it, he was gone.
Right, right.
Because in your view... What did you make of it?
I mean, I think I say what I made of it.
It was wonderful.
But I mean, he saw something he didn't like.
He didn't like because you were going in a direction that he didn't really want to go in.
Right.
It was asserting yourself.
In a way that was counter to what maybe he wanted for himself, which might even be
a form of redemption for himself you think he was seeking a form of redemption through you i think he was yeah i mean that's the way in which parents do i think uh it's a misguided impulse like parents have but yeah you see and one thing we have any by the way just look a few of those real beliefs right right the red light is on the red light is on right mike i don't have my glasses yeah it's turning yeah that's fine um
I think all these votes, you know, that I've hardly ever used them.
One thing we haven't even touched on yet, which I really love about the book, you know, is we really do give a feel for the Irish-American experience of our generation.
You know, it's the second or third generation.
We haven't had the popular impact, the influence.
as strong and as pervasive as it was if they were first generation.
Yes, it's true.
And, you know, from somebody who's almost precisely my own age, you know, and you throw things at me that, I'd forgotten about Bishop Fulton Sheen, but I remember watching him on television.
Right.
Hard-ass crew, he was something.
Right, he was.
I'm not Catholic, you know, but... Or Spelman.
Spelman, Spelman, I didn't know about it.
I mean, that was kind of asking.
That's enough to mention that some of you
His biographer asserts that, asserts that there are those rumors about it.
But how times have changed.
Yeah, it's true.
When I was a reporter before I became a book editor, I was the person responsible.
Remember Father Fredette?
Yes, yes.
I don't know why he chased him off to Canada.
I'm the one who wrote the stories that exposed what he had been doing.
That's the beginning of that.
And the church got him the hell out of town.
And the diocese.
And they were angry, like, who's making these charges?
It's like some kid with a problem was trying to blackmail a priest.
And they really allowed him to get out, and they wouldn't go after him.
And so 20 years later, he's doing this, you know, it all comes back.
He's in jail now.
He came back.
But the feeling about this kind of behavior then was,
Give me a break.
It's not true.
You're libeling.
You're slandering.
You're infaming these men of God.
It's one of the most shocking things Catholics of my generation have to confront, which is that the most outrageous slurs, anti-Catholic, know-nothing, nativist slurs against priests, in some cases, turn out to be true.
It's a very shocking thing.
It's a skull leader, too.
John Paul Casey does that, you know.
I mean, they go where they go.
I don't want to get into that.
But you really do get the texture.
I mean, for your mother, for instance, seeing you tell a man of the cloth was one of the great validations.
It was.
There's a special place in heaven for the mother of a priest.
Is that right?
So it's the myth, right?
And as you remember, when I told them that they're, told my parents that I'm leaving the priesthood and my mother gets up and leaves the table and goes upstairs, I remember thinking, what is the place in heaven for the mother of the next priest?
Heartbreaking.
Had it not been for the war, let's say, you know, you all need what ifs.
But let's say, you also say, because then you love being a priest.
And you'll have to address yourself to that and I'll follow up where I want to go around.
Well, I think maybe we should point out you didn't leave the priesthood.
I don't know if that's the correct word.
Well, I didn't leave the church.
I did leave the priesthood.
You didn't leave the church.
I didn't leave the church.
I didn't leave the
This is not a man who in any way has lost his faith.
Right.
It's true.
So if it hadn't been, if the war hadn't developed and you were here, do you think it would have remained?
Well, perhaps I would have.
I mean, it's impossible to know.
I think that the culture of hierarchy was so deeply ingrained in me that it almost would have taken something like a war to blow it apart.
because it was the culture of hierarchy that was destroyed for me.
And that's why I left the priesthood.
It wasn't poverty, chastity, or obedience, exactly.
I mean, it was the way in which the whole culture presumes superiors and inferiors.
And I couldn't be part of that anymore.
I couldn't be inferior to them, but neither could I be superior to these other people.
You know, it just...
ended for me, so I couldn't be a priest.
But at the same time, I also learned to believe in a God who himself had rejected that.
That's what the story of Jesus is all about for me.
So by the end of it, my faith in Jesus and what Christianity is about was more powerful than ever, even if my role in the church was impossible now.
So I'm still a Catholic.
I
I'm a dissenting Catholic, and I'm in tension with the way in which the Church is clinging to this old mode of... A dissenting Catholic.
And I still care very much about the Church and argue with the Church and argue against this hierarchical authoritarian form that it embraced.
But for me, the war gave me this...
position from which to dissent.
It's very ironic.
Well, yeah, not just ours, but our parents as well, I think.
I mean, it's, and it's, it's, it's for better and for worse, I would say.
And I meant that in a very uncomfortable way.
Right, for better and for worse.
We, we, obviously a lot of our cultural problems today and political problems today go back to
the breakdown of our ability to believe in the exercise of power in our government.
But the bad part is we see it manifest every day, the nitpicking of political leadership, the inability to trust our politicians, et cetera, et cetera.
But the good part is also that there's a way in which the American people
are very resolute and very clear about what they will and won't allow.
We could have had savage wars in Central America in our time.
We could have had a savage war with the Russians in our time.
Something broke in the American war-making impulse in Vietnam, and I think that's very powerful, very important.
You say that
Whenever you hear the song, beautiful tune, there's always a sense of sadness.
And songs, of course, music has the power to do that.
You can make music, flashbacks, wherever you were, whatever you were doing in your life.
And as you said, you get a profound sense of sadness.
Right.
Do you, by expansion, get a profound sense of sadness when you think about your relationship with your father during that period?
What could have been... Was this
Did you set off in a path of no return?
Did it have to follow the course that it did?
Have you ever played out in your mind things you would like to have done differently that might have affected the relationship?
Well, I wish that I were... I know what you mean.
I do feel deeply sad about it, obviously.
I had this fantasy when I was writing the book, Nick, that by the end of it, I'm going to feel fine about this.
And at the end of this story, I'm going to have worked through all this stuff, and there's going to be a knot I'm going to tie, and I'm going to be able to put my pen down and say, you know, thanks be to God, this has been a great experience.
And it shocked me, really, to get to the end of the story and just feel completely, to use my father's word, heartbroken by it, which I did, and I still feel it, and
frankly, it's one of the, it confuses me as a professional writer now in terms of the publishing process, because for me the book is essentially so sad that I don't know how in the world I can meet the public about it.
But, I mean, I would include you in that as a representative of the public in this encounter we're having now.
It's
It's confusing to me, really, because it's a very sad story.
Finally.
Briefly, can you still change typos in the book?
This has been corrected.
There are plenty of mistakes in there.
I got one.
It's small, but it's on page 38.
It's called Adolf P.H.
Adolf Hitler is what it happened.
I hope that's caught.
It's too late if it isn't, but I hope it's caught.
It's no big deal.
It is a big deal, actually.
I'd hate to see it.
But that's the only one I found.
If you're coming out in May, there may be a chance.
I'll call.
I'll go crazy about that.
I was changing things up until they audited me.
They wouldn't take my calls anymore.
They said, you're going to get charged for these things.
I said, I don't care.
I don't care.
It's got to be right.
I'm sorry to go off on that.
No, I appreciate that.
It's not PH.
I love the students.
At one point, at some point, you have to
I asked you about the state of your faith when you did that.
You gave me that, I think.
Because this primary piece is for Publishers Weekly, you know, there are things that they want to know for their audience, which I don't necessarily want for my newspaper audience, but they really want to follow the chronology of the development of the writer, they want to know agents, editors, the nuts and bolts,
So, but I think we can do this in a way that you left... Of course, I read the book, and I just have to take that.
Alan Tate.
Why don't you just talk a little bit about Alan Tate?
Well... He gave you permission to be a writer.
He gave me... And he said you couldn't do both.
And he said I couldn't do both, right.
Maybe you can just... Well, you know, Alan Tate was so gracious toward me
I teach writing, and I regard him as a kind of model of how to give young writers the benefit of the doubt.
It gave me a huge benefit of the doubt.
And he did give me permission to be a writer, and I tell the story in the book of how he inscribed his collective poems to me, for James, with best wishes in your two vocations.
And then he handed me the book, and I read that inscription.
I was very moved by it.
I thought, oh, what a nice story.
But what really moved me about it was he was including and he was affirming that I had the vocation to be a poet, which I took as an enormous affirmation from Alan Tate.
And when I read it, and my heart leaped, leapt as I read it, and I looked up at him, and then he was sort of sadly shaking his head, and then he said, his addendum, but you can't have both.
know he said as if i did know and i of course thought he didn't he had an old-fashioned idea yeah i didn't think he was right but he was and then later of course i felt haunted by that what year was this 66 well i was ordained in 69 yeah i left yeah yeah
this really does prefigure right right when i do these things i'm always in my mind trying to find my lead right my kicker how i am right i think i have both right now well alan tate is probably yeah the other thing is that i went to alan tate then in 68 for permission to leave the priesthood and be a writer and he didn't recognize me but his own need then
called out of me an act of pastoral ministry, which sent me back into the priesthood.
So anyway, I guess at that point in 66 now, you're 23 years old, I guess.
And you're not writing professionally, and you're not writing for publication necessarily, outside of the church, whatever, which is later.
But
That must have been giving you some sense that there is something else in life besides going into the church, becoming a career Air Force officer.
Right, another world.
Another world.
Right, which opens up to me, why?
Because of the Paulus Fathers, who affirmed my vocation as a writer.
It's a very good fortune.
Right, it's true.
It's true, it's true.
This community of men,
you know, really sent me into my life as a writer.
They nurtured it.
They did, yes.
They encouraged it.
And they were my teachers.
That wasn't lost on me, by the way.
You gathered that, right?
I mean, it's a very powerful part of my experience.
And even when they knew it was going to take me away from them, they found ways to affirm me.
As a writer, yes.
Wonderful.
Yeah, I worship at the Paula Center here, where I used to live, on Park Street, just down from the State House.
The name of the Paula Center?
The Paula Center, yeah.
And how often do you do this?
Well, I was there Sunday, you know, I go there regularly, Sundays.
Palm Sundays?
Yeah.
And how about your family?
Well, Lex is an Episcopalian.
We have an ecumenical marriage.
And our children are being raised to leave a lot of these petty disputes behind, I hope.
Well, as you know better than anybody because you've worked with her, I'm married to Alexandra Marshall, who's a novelist.
Lizzy is, that's L-I-Z-Z-Y.
And that is her name?
Yeah, Lizzy, yeah.
or Elizabeth, but we call her Lizzy, L-I-Z-Z-Y, is 16.
She's a sophomore in high school.
And Patrick, who's named for Patrick Hughes, about whom I write in the book, who's that man who skates across the pond.
I love that scene.
I thought you were setting us up for a tragedy there.
Yeah, it's quite the opposite, isn't it?
I thought he was going down.
Yeah, right.
It's quite the opposite, isn't it?
It's a glorious thing that he skates ahead of that.
It's wonderful.
It's a version of what you said about God putting our eyes on the front of our heads, you know.
Don't look bad.
But Patrick is 13, about to be 14 next week.
Patrick was born on April 4th, and I remember realizing one day that... That's tomorrow.
It's tomorrow.
I remember realizing one day that my... That's what I said next week.
That my
assumption about april 4th was that it would always be a cursed day in my life because it was the day martin the king was shot that day i describe in there as a kind of pivotal moment in my life that's the night my father says to me one word see and so years later to realize that even a cursed day like that can be transformed now of course it's
just a very precious day.
My older daughter was born on the 13th.
My wife was labeled for 17 hours, and she was born on the 13th hour, on the 13th day.
No kidding, wow.
So I can tell you immediately, 13 becomes my favorite.
Yeah, your favorite number.
Yeah, right, right.
You just say, well, that changes it for the better, you know.
And I go after 13 now.
Every time I see it, I embrace it.
That's great.
Yeah.
You know, I said, I'm not going to lay baggage on this kid.
Her first birthday was a flight in the 13th.
So, you know, that's the way that goes.
So you left in 75, and then you met Lexa.
You just say in the book that you both had the same literary.
We had, right.
And that's how we can kind of get into that.
Right.
Don Cutler, who at the time... Don Donald?
Donald Cutler, C-U-T-L-E-R.
A New York agent?
He was at Sterling Lord then.
And...
he uh he became my agent because i had a play done at the berkshire theater festival which he saw in workshop in in new york and he had lex as a client and he introduced us and he's also an episcopal priest really and so he also married us
It is amazing, yeah, in an ecumenical service.
You don't think this can't be a movie?
And he's still my agent, and I'm very devoted to him.
And he placed my first novel at Little Brown, which was Madonna Red, which was published in 76.
Did that become a film?
No, I've never had any of my novels made into a film, no.
There was a lot of talk about that being a film, and it was owned by various studios, Robert Redford and all that, right?
And I've been publishing every two or three years.
How did you get him as an agent?
I had a play that the Berkshire Theatre Festival did.
You told me that.
Yeah, I left the priesthood, went to Stockbridge.
The play was done in New York.
He came to the play.
Did you tell me you told me that?
Yeah.
See, that's the problem with tapers.
It's okay.
I used to take notes, but you're thinking ahead of where you want to go, and I think the attention you ought to be.
And briefly, tell me, is Lexus still writing?
And Lexus publishing a novel next year at Houghton-Efflin as it happens.
It's called Wedding Pictures, a novel about... It's a kind of love story for
Grown Ups, which is a phrase a reviewer used about her novel, Gus and Brons, years ago.
But that's what this is.
That was her first.
Yeah, that was her first.
And then there was Tender Offer, which you write.
And anything since then?
And Brass Bed, another novel, which was published maybe eight years ago.
And then this will be her next novel.
And she has the same agent as well?
She's actually changed.
She's Elaine Markson as her agent.
Oh, I see.
Okay.
And then what is it like to have a... I love it when I ask you a couple of people who focus on rights, you know, Margaret Drabble and Michael Hallway, and of course Justin and Anna Krasnick over there.
well we we we do we work in separate rooms but we're it's a consoling experience to have somebody else who shares the life it's a kind of cottage industry we you know we could be country curtains after a certain point I tend to be shy about my work until I'm
pretty firmly connected to it.
I write in longhand the first draft, whatever I do, and I don't show it to anybody until I've done the second draft on the word processor.
So I go a long time without anybody seeing what I'm doing.
And even in this particular book as well?
Yes.
Did you ever discuss certain things with her about the what or not?
Yeah, well, to the extent that I was, of course, discussing great questions in my life, yes, but...
But I have it, you know, the work has to gel to a certain point before I can show it to somebody.
So Madonna read this first book published in 1976.
That's just a year after reading.
Right.
Was this in progress while you were still with the book?
No, it wasn't.
I wrote it, well, I resigned from the ministry, from the pastoral work of the priesthood in 1974.
And then I had
A year's, quote, leave of absence, which is when I was writing.
I wrote a play and a novel from in 74 into 75, and then it was published in 76.
And the next book after that?
It was Mortal Friends, published in 70.
And we first met then, right?
That was in 78.
That was a full selection book of the month.
Yeah, it was.
It was the book that gave me my career.
And tell me how the genesis of that worked.
Well, when I was a priest, when I was a priest, I had this day off a week, and it was always a weekday, because priests work on weekends.
And I was alone, and I was a solitary person.
And when I came to Boston, I loved the city of Boston.
As you know, I'm a military brat.
I don't grow up with any particular roots anyplace.
Washington is no place to have
roots.
And the solid, rooted culture of Irish Boston really swept me away.
I loved it.
And on my days off when I was a priest, so really from 69 right through 74, 75, what I loved doing was walking.
And I loved the stories of the city.
And I just gathered the stories of the city that way.
So after I'd written
Madonna read, I stopped and I said, now what do I really want to write here?
Boston's busing crisis was underway and the Irish conflict with blacks was very powerful and I was really obsessed with what's behind this?
How did the Boston Irish get to be who they are?
And so I
I told the story.
I told what I took to be the story of who the Boston Irish are.
And that turned out to be Mortal Friends.
And that was Little Brown, I think?
Little Brown, yeah.
Little Brown published my first four novels, which were Madonna Red, Mortal Friends, Fault Lines, my first five novels, actually, Fault Lines,
which was 80, 80.
Family Trade, which was... That's right, about Richard III, an actor and his girlfriend.
I was a playwright in residence for a year at the Actor's Studio in New York, you know, when I left the priesthood.
And then Family Trade in 81, maybe, and 83 or 84, Prince of Peace.
And then I published in 85 or 86 at Dutton, Supply of Heroes, a novel about the Irish rising, which was basically inspired by my mother's family.
Did you have to do any traveling?
I did.
I was in Ireland a lot for that.
It was set in Tipperary.
It's basically about the Irish who fought in the war for the British during World War I, as opposed to the Irish who were rebels.
The genesis of that was that my mother grew up with the family myth that her uncle, Jim, had died in the rebellion in 1916, and so he was an anti-British patriot.
I went to Ireland in 1970 and went to his village, tracked down his village,
because I was curious about the story and I wanted to find out what role he had played in the Easter Uprising and so forth.
I found his tombstone in a little village up in the hills in Tipperary in a long abandoned graveyard.
And it showed his name and the fact that he died in 1916.
So I'm thinking, geez, maybe there's something to this.
But it was the tombstone of a British soldier.
And it said, rule Britannia.
And it said,
under his dates, killed in France.
So that the family myth had completely turned over who he was.
He was a British soldier.
Well, I just... No, I mean, well, then I found some people in the village, got the story, and I thought, well, here's the story.
And 250 Irish rebels took over the post office in Dublin that day, Easter Monday, 1916.
And at that moment,
250,000 Irish Catholics were in British uniform in France.
It's a story people don't know.
50,000 Irish people died in World War I.
50,000.
That's as many... You know what a trauma we had in this country.
I mean, imagine a country that's only 6 million people.
50,000...
So Supply of Heroes tells that story.
That's from, there was the Unionist, the Protestant Unionist, Edward Carson, who introduced the legislation in 1916 in Parliament for a draft law, for conscription, the first time the British Empire had ever had a draft.
And of course they had to draft people by then because the volunteers had all been killed.
And his speech included the line about the draft, the necessary supply of heroes must be maintained at all costs.
That's what they had going, a supply of heroes, just feeding them into the maw of the trenches.
And then after that, I published Firebird, a Cold War spy novel set in Washington with Dutton.
My editor at Dutton was Joe Cannon, a man I admire very much.
And then he came to Houghton Mifflin, and I went to Houghton Mifflin.
Joe, C-A-N-N-O-N.
Cannon, K-A-N-O-N.
Right.
Still there?
No, and he left Houghton Mifflin last year.
And now I'm working with Wendy Strothman.
S-T-R-O-T-H-M-A-N.
Did we get all the editors early in the 90s?
Bill Phillips at Little Brown gave me my career.
And he was a wonderful editor, and he's still the editor-in-chief at Little Brown.
And he's a... P-H-I-L-L-I-P-S.
P-H-I-L-L-I-P-S.
William Phillips.
Gave me my career.
What extent?
Well, he bought my first novel, and he shepherded me through my first five novels.
And give me a little preceding of Madonna Red.
Madonna Red is a thriller.
It's about an IRA attempt to kill the British ambassador to the United States, set in Washington.
Now, one would have thought, you see, involved in all the things that you were involved in.
I mean, it's so uncharacteristic here to be going out and doing a commercial entertainment.
Yeah.
Did you see it?
I did, yeah.
I mean, Madonna Red is the most deliberately commercial of the novels I've written.
So what were you thinking?
I've got to make a living, or this is my job?
Well, I don't know.
I didn't have any literary pretensions about my work.
I still don't.
I think of myself as a storyteller.
And I set out to tell a story.
I wanted to tell a story about the priesthood, since I had just left the priesthood.
But I didn't want to directly tell the story, and I also wanted to tell... And so the hero in that, in Madonna Red, is a priest.
And it's a thriller, but it's a story about a priest who goes from the beginning of the story, the first line of that story, at least at one draft, I'm not sure how it was...
Father Tierney knew exactly what to do.
And it was describing the confidence with which he would enact the ritual of the Mass.
And by the end of the story, the last line... I'm not sure how... I remember vividly in the writing of it, the last line was, Father Tierney couldn't remember what was next.
He had come to a point where his hold on the form
was gone.
And it was my own way of getting into the business of my own having lost a hold of this ordered world of the priesthood.
And I did it by telling... I did it as... indirectly, but it was as direct as I could do it at that point in my life.
So I, in a sense, took refuge in the form of a political thriller.
The red lights still on?
Yes, it is.
you began as a poet and did a playwright.
Right.
I mean, the two most impossible things to, you know, it's hard enough to get a book published.
Try and get a play produced.
Right.
And staged.
Try and get a volume of poetry published and then try and make a living off it.
Right.
If these are the two areas you, I wouldn't say toyed with, that you dealt with.
Do you still write poetry, number one?
I don't write poetry, no.
And I haven't written a play in many years.
I found the form of the novel and really found a home in it.
I feel very much a novelist.
The spaciousness of it is important to me.
But I have to believe the experience of working as a playwright certainly helped you technically and professionally.
I mean, when you want to know the carpentry, you're putting together.
Yes, right.
And the structure of narrative is basic.
And I've learned a lot over the years from playwriting, but also from novel writing, what the structure of narrative is.
And I teach writing, and that's been very helpful to me also.
I teach writing at Emerson College.
And I've been doing that for most of a decade.
Once a week during the year?
Once a week, yeah.
Are there seminars?
It's a workshop.
Twelve writing students.
They're graduate students in writing.
Try to.
Try to affirm what's good in what they're doing.
and tell them the truth about it and try to be a good editor to people.
Is Tate alive?
Tate died about 19... in the early 70s.
I forget exactly when.
He really didn't see what became of you.
No, I think he died maybe in the mid-70s.
No, he didn't.
That would have been nice.
It would have.
It would have meant a lot to me.
You still have, of course, a bit of a book you inscribed to.
I do.
And that must be the... Yeah, as a book lover, I'll show it to you.
I'll take you up and show it to you.
Pardon me for jumping around here.
No problem.
I think we are covering some great stuff.
While I'm looking at my notes here, if there's anything that you want to... We're covering, going very quickly.
Of course, we've got some books, you know, and because it's so out of my breath, I mean, I must feel free to take what I... Sure, sure, sure.
And I'll be happy to call you and go over your quotes
Okay, fine, great.
I believe in doing it.
Great, I'd appreciate it.
I'd like to get it right.
In fact, I'll probably read you the whole story.
I'd appreciate it.
Well, I'm in your hands, so I'll... No, no, I'd like to get it right.
Good, good, great.
And inevitably we'll find a few mistakes.
Good.
And so we'll fix them.
Great, great.
So don't worry about how this is going to... Okay, great.
Gene McCarthy, worked with Gene McCarthy...
I guess you said one fact or another that I wondered if this was a story you felt you had to tell, or was it a story that you felt it was time to tell?
Well, the single most powerful motive I have in telling the story, there are a lot of reasons, of course, but one day when I watched my children shrink back in
in fear and mystification from my senile father who really wasn't capable of relating to them.
That overwhelmed me with sadness because I knew they would never have a memory of him as he was when he was grave.
And so I was aware at a certain point of
resolving to tell the story in a way that my children could have it.
And to make sure they understood both who he was, who my mother was, and what we'd been through together.
So I quite deliberately dedicate this novel, I mean this novel, this memoir, to Lexa, Lizzie, and Pat.
But Lizzie and Pat gave me the main motive I had for writing it.
What you've described is that
Well, I wouldn't say not any.
You know, there was this warmth of a common idea of father-son manhood.
But my father was a reserved man, generally.
And, of course, as I became a man, we were apart.
I remember that moment of delivering the newspapers with him as a moment of tremendous closeness and warmth.
Obviously there weren't a lot of those, because that wouldn't stand out quite so dramatically if there were.
Is there anything you regret in the relationship that you wish had been there?
Well, I regret that I wasn't...
I mean, this is like regretting history.
I regret that I didn't know then what I know now about how complicated life is.
When I was in conflict with my father, I thought things were pretty simple.
You either for the war or against it.
I didn't understand that a man of conscience inside the Pentagon would have his own version of the struggle that seemed so important to me outside the Pentagon.
I wish I'd understood more the levels of moral complication that I understand now.
And, of course, it was never articulated to you directly, but you really believed that being the solid devout Catholics that you kind of weren't, that deep down, you know, this has almost been evocating to all Irish Catholics, is that there was a sense of sin here.
Yeah.
Your father, you know, your mother always had... Right.
I mean, she never said this, but there was a sense that she had lured him away.
Right.
And, of course, my conclusions about that come from the fact that she said nothing about it.
Yeah.
That's an intuitive idea, probably, I guess.
Right.
But knowing your mother and your father and also knowing the community that you come from.
So, really, there were plans for you to... Right.
I don't know if you know where his tone is.
I began to think of it as taking his place.
Taking his place.
Yeah.
Which, of course, is the meaning I took from that moment which I described when he weeps.
The one time he weeps when I'm blessing him after I've just been ordained to the priesthood.
The meaning I take from that is I'm in his place now.
The
the burden, the curse is lifted.
And you always confess at some point, and it's not hypocrisy, but you feel hypocritical at some point.
There are points where you could have said things that you didn't say.
You could have done another thing with Hoover.
Right.
Your brother says he's a vegetarian.
He said, here, I'm eating turkey for the second time today.
Right.
And I'm the priest.
It's really funny.
It's true.
Right.
Isn't that something?
Is he still a vegetarian?
Yeah.
Now, was this moral of his father?
Like me?
Yeah, no, it was an act of rejection of violence and blood.
Yeah.
So, you see, there are, one would almost like to find out all the different stories of your siblings.
It's true.
That you had a brother being a hard-ass FBI.
Right, right.
He's still there, apparently.
Right.
He just retired.
Really?
Did you discuss it?
He's been in charge of the Unabomber case.
Which case is it?
Oh, really?
That's his case?
Yeah.
I've probably seen him on TV, then.
He hasn't been on TV, no.
So, I mean, you know, he just retired as the assistant special agent in charge of the Chicago field, though.
And, of course, you talk about irony of ironies.
At what point he had a job,
To find your brother, but... Yeah, to find my brother, yeah.
Basically, that was... Yeah, that was the job, right.
In a general sense.
Right, and there I am, you know, my friends getting busted in the Camden draft board, and him being one of the arresting officers, you know.
They came in there with shotguns.
You should... I mean, I had this... They described it to me.
My friends described it to me, these FBI... One girl, a little girl, you know, frail, little flower child.
The double barrel of an FBI agent's shotgun under her chin like this.
And it might have been my brother, because he was one of them.
And then I'm at the trial to testify as a character witness for her.
So how do you resolve these things?
We survived, even then we were able to.
When I went to the Camden trial, I stayed with my brother.
Brian.
We went into the trial together.
And how about the older brother?
He's a professor at the University of Puerto Rico.
Has a certain distance from the family, but we're still... And he and I... Well, our relationship was set by that experience in a sad way.
But my last, at the end of this book, I describe that moment at my father's funeral when my brothers are falling into line behind the casket, just like Kennedy's funeral, you know, with the horse and all that stuff.
You say same bands, different music?
Yeah, same bands, different music.
And as we're falling into line, of course, then we all realize that Joe can't walk with us.
And he's getting into the limousine.
And I had this overwhelming feeling that I wanted him to carry me.
I mean, it was just this feeling of he's who I belong with now.
Have you had any reaction from your family?
Well, the first thing I did when I finished the manuscript last summer was go to CopyCop and make four copies.
and send it to my four brothers with a note saying, this goes no further if you tell me.
You mean you would have terminated it?
Right.
And I said, is there anything in here that you don't want me to write, then tell me.
No, they all... I mean, they each in their own way said, well, it's how you remember it.
It's your version of the story.
And they weren't all altogether pleased by everything.
And there was some feeling of, this is private, and I wish you wouldn't go public with it.
But basically they all said, affirmed it, affirmed me, said yes publicly.
The guy who described yourself accurately, I believe, as a storyteller.
Yeah.
Is this telling a story?
Sure.
Well, you know, it's quite clear to me that the skills I bring to my work as a novelist, having learned a lot about novel writing over the years by doing it, really enabled me to tell this story.
I mean, the form of the story liberated my ability to tell it.
The structure of the story, once I saw a structure, then I could handle the terrible...